.ve-header "Rosenthal's *Elaine*: Mourning the Loss of Femenine Perfection and Love"
.ve-media wc:Toby_Edward_Rosenthal_-_Elaine_-_1917.3_-_Art_Institute_of_Chicago.jpg

# Introduction
*Elaine* was painted by Toby Edward Rosenthal in 1874. The subject matter of this work is from the legend of King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table, specifically the death of the character Elaine, who died of a broken heart. This poignant scene utilizes lighting to add to the tragedy of the scene. The figure of Elaine is unnaturally well lit, with no evident light source. She is in contrast with the dark boat, the black cloaked figure steering the vessel, and the shadowy waters and landscape. Her beauty and purity is literally highlighted, her light shining even in death. Her pale skin takes on the texture of porcelain.The viewer is invited to mourn the loss of such a pinnacle of perfection, soon to be lost forever in the encroaching darkness. The fabrics covering the lower half of her body, and the gold accents of the table and pillow she rests upon shimmer, and the folds of the dress she wears cascade elegently. The flowers adorning the boat are delicately rendered, with one rose falling into the water, its perfect beauty soon to be lost just as Elaine had been. A white bird flies toward the dark land in the distance, where its beauty no longer will be seen. Perhaps the bird is on a similar journey as Elaine, from the light of beauty to the darkness of death. This tragic story and visual account of her death captured the hearts of audiences, who similarly idolized and upheld the ideals Elaine represented. The emotion and overtone of loss in this work make the painting all the more impactful and memorable. 

