.ve-header "Rosenthal: Mourning the Loss of Feminine Perfection and Love"


# Beauty in Beauty
*Elaine* was painted by Toby Edward Rosenthal in 1874. The subject matter of this work is from the legend of King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table, specifically the death of the character Elaine, who died of a broken heart. This poignant scene utilizes lighting to add to the tragedy of the scene. The figure of Elaine is idealized and streamlined. She is unnaturally well lit, with no evident light source. She is in contrast with the dark boat, the black cloaked figure steering the vessel, and the shadowy waters and landscape. Her beauty and purity is literally highlighted, her light shining even in death. Her pale skin takes on the texture of porcelain. Despite being exposed to the destructive force of death, she is unmarred. The viewer is invited to mourn the loss of such a pinnacle of perfection, soon to be lost forever in the encroaching darkness. The fabrics covering the lower half of her body and the gold accents of the table and pillow she rests upon shimmer, and the folds of the dress she wears cascade elegently. This tragic story and visual account of her death captured the hearts of audiences, who similarly idolized and upheld the ideals Elaine represented. The emotion and overtone of loss in this work make the painting all the more impactful and memorable.
.ve-media https://api.artic.edu/api/v1/artworks/72320/manifest.json

# Pre-Raphaelite Influence

The Pre-Raphaelites were a broterhood of artisticaly and ideologically aligned artists founded in 1848. Its members were incredibly interested in medieval subjects and culture,  and were very concerned with nature and its careful and realistic representation in art. They believed in an art that was honest and spiritual, one that was connected with the world and the self rather than a soulless replication of previous forms. This brotherhood felt a need for reform in the practice of art making, and actively pursued a more naturalistic and wholistic art. 
This painting, *Ophelia* by Pre-Raphaelite Sir John Everett Millais, 1851-52, depicts another female literary character that tragically dies, the character of Ophelia from Shakespeare's Hamlet. She is depicted in the moments before her drowning, arms lazily cast out and lips parted. Flowers float alongside her body, forming an analogue to her body. The vivid coloration of the work was a consistent feature in Pre-Raphaelite works, as brilliant colors evoked a more lively art of the past, and served as an effective tool to break out of a percieved monotony in art at the time, which was so entwined with Renaissance and Classical tradition. The tragic female subjects of *Ophelia* and *Elaine* show an interest in historic literature. Both works show a deep attention to detail in the manner nature is depicted. Both works capture an approaching death and loss of beauty.
